[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's somebody
who said very rightly,
the purpose of our lives is
to help others through it.
I'm a writer, and I'm
an environmentalist,
and I'm an activist.
And I work for
American-Indian people,
and I used to work
for Cesar Chavez.
And I'm kind of a lefty.
As a kid, I was
very wild as a boy.
And in fact, my father felt
obliged to throw me out
when I was 17.
And he was right.
And I was kind of a--
I don't know-- angry kid.
And since then I've
obviously modified my ways.
I certainly have
patched it up with him.
We were good friends
when he died.
But I was difficult.
I was very difficult.
And my wives have found
me difficult, too.
[LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've been a zen
student for many years
and really since
about 1969 or '70.
I'd been looking for a spiritual
practice for quite a long time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
"The search may begin
with a restless feeling,
as if one were being watched.
One turns in all directions
and sees nothing.
Yet one senses that
there is a source
for this deep restlessness.
And the path that leads
there is not a path
to a strange place
but the path home.
But you are home, cries
the Witch of the North.
All you have to do is wake up.
The journey is hard
for the secret place.
Where we have always
been is overgrown
with thorns and thickets of
ideas, of fears and defenses,
prejudices and repressions.
The holy grail is
what Zen Buddhists
call one's own true nature.
Each man is his own
savior after all."
"Meditation has nothing
to do with contemplation
of eternal questions
or one's own folly
or even of one's navel, although
a clearer view of these enigmas
may result. It has nothing to
do with thought of any kind,
with anything at all, in fact,
but intuiting the true nature
of existence, which
is why it has appeared
in one form or another in almost
every culture known to man."
We're all enlightened
beings in our true nature.
But there are lamps that
haven't been turned on.
All it takes is that little
glimpse, that breakthrough,
that opening to
turn the light on.
What?
And whatever you're looking
at was there all the time.
We don't acquire wisdom.
We get rid of things.
This is and is always based on
the most simple, spare things.
You drop all these acquired
emotions prejudices
and bad habits.
And you get, ideally, simpler
and simpler and simpler, more
and more spare.
That I find that just very
beautiful and a great relief.
You just drop stuff.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think the reason why
I practice is to heal.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I had wanted to go maybe do some
therapy but couldn't afford it
and didn't have enough money
to of sit and tell someone
all of my troubles and
all of my problems.
And I realized there's another
way for me to know myself.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I'd been a drinker, a smoker.
I've done drugs, all this stuff.
Nothing has given me the peace
that meditation has given me
and allowed me now to go, oh,
all that's still out there.
I could do all that
to kill my pain again.
But I've already
done that dance.
That dance didn't fill me up.
[LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I had to learn the hard way and
go bankrupt and be poor and be
broke and hold on to my little
food stamp container of coins
that I got when I
was seven years old.
I had to begin to sever my
connection to a consciousness
that was poverty-stricken.
So now I just try to go,
oh, when I get antsy.
Sit down.
Just sit down and let it try
to work itself out that way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My brain is a computer.
It will always
run, because that's
what it was designed to do--
[INTERPOSING SENTENCES]----
the chaos-- nervous energy--
Catholic upbringing-- as
God-- divinity first--
we live-- --a kid--
--that's divine-- my journey--
I identify-- --I want easy.
So how do I develop the ability
to slow my computer down so
I have peace, so I
can get to my heart?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The only way for
me to do that is
to get connected to my breath.
[DEEP BREATHING]
Even if I can't completely
let go of all my thoughts,
if I could observe
them going by and have
a little giggle about
them and release them,
then I feel like I'm getting
closer to my true presence.
I could sit in
front of the ocean
and listen to the ocean
on a beach for hours.
And now I think I could
listen to my breath for hours.
[DEEP BREATHING]
And then when I get
up from that state,
I sort of feel more connected.
I feel happier.
I feel more observant.
I feel kinder.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's helped my work in the
last two years immeasurably.
Because you've got to
understand, I'm an actor.
So I've got to go to the theater
tonight and be this other guy.
And I'm an actor who throws
himself so fully into his work
that it takes me
time to get out.
I let it take my
whole life over.
Sometimes after a job
I'm like, well, who am I?
What am I?
[LAUGHS]
There's a Giancarlo
who is the actor who
can soak up all that ego.
And there's the Giancarlo
who is the yogi, who
is dedicated to his practice,
who practices physical yoga
and meditation every
single day of his life.
So how do I blend those people
together and enjoy that blend?
I always have them separate.
"Breaking Bad" blew everything
open because I completely
bought my practice into my work.
I breathed.
I would go off to the side
and sit and close my eyes
and stare at my nose
and listen to my breath
before I went on set.
I wanted Gustavo Fring to
be more of an observer.
And then I wanted to
add just the quiet peace
to that observance of people.
And then I wanted to be able to
access focus and intention even
on a dark level right away.
They think I'm acting.
I'm not acting at all.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think what I'm realizing
is I'm perfect just as I am
and there's nothing
I need to do.
And that brings me really great
solace, really great peace,
really great calm.
I like I like that.
I'll go with that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[DEEP BREATHING IN PATTERN]
>> May the longtime
sun shine upon you,
all love surround you and the
pure light within you guide
your way on.
Sat Nam It makes me cry.
>> Why does it make you cry?
>> I think if you're practicing
Kundalini right, you might--
you'll be crying.
[LAUGHS]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I was 16 years old, I
really struggled with anxiety.
And my mom taught
me how to meditate.
But then, like most adolescents,
I turned my back on that truth
and I started to really seek my
self-worth outside of myself.
By the time I was
25 years old, I
was severely addicted to drugs
and alcohol, to relationship,
very codependent.
And I hit that big
bottom, that life bottom
that was the greatest
blessing of my life, which
was that moment where I
recognized that there has
to be a better way than this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
(CHANTING) Sa Ta Na Ma, Sa Ta
Na Ma, Sa Ta Na Ma, Sa Ta Na Ma,
Sa Ta Na Ma, Sa Ta, Na, Ma.
Kundalini is the
yoga of awareness.
It's a practice of really
elevating your dormant energy.
The Kundalini energy sits
at the base of our spine,
and through the
practice of Kundalini,
we can raise that energy up so
we can have stronger intuition.
It's all about really
raising our vitality
and opening our
heart in a major way.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Sat Nam, Sat Nam, Sat Nam, Sat
Nam, Sat Nam, Sat Nam, Sat Nam.
So when we're repeating
mantras or we're
moving our hands
in a specific way,
we're allowing ourselves
to get into the meditation.
We can allow ourselves to lose
our fears in that meditation,
lose our anxieties
in that meditation.
And we can go into a space where
we're actually flowing with it
rather than moving against it.
I think that the more I have
expanded my inner awareness
and the longer I can be still,
not even length of time,
just having the
desire to be still
helps me tap into listening
to what needs to come through
rather than thinking about
what needs to be said.
That silence allows you to be a
greater messenger for the work
that you're here to share.
I suffer from still just sort of
like addiction in other forms,
so now may be just
addiction to the internet
or whatever pops
up and creeps up.
The automatic response
is to turn to the food
or turn to the drugs or turn
to the work or turn to--
roll of bed and just
check your email
rather than roll out
of bed and breathe.
That's why the commitment
and the discipline
is really important to me.
I require discipline in
order to stay on path.
[DEEP BREATH]
[CHANTING]
[WHISPERED CHANTING]
We've spent most of our
lives forgetting, unlearning,
unlearning the
love that we were.
And the real work
that we have to do
is unlearn the fear that
we've chosen to believe in.
Yogi Bhajan said he had a
philosophy-- one third, one
third, one third, that when
we would come to this time
that we are in now, known
as the Aquarian Age,
we'd be living in
this time of chaos
and fast pace and
everything at our fingertips
and all of this
technology and all
of these messages and
everything so fast.
It's like a pressure cooker.
And he said that one third will
go mad, one third will die,
and one third will wake up.
And so for this new
generation, my question
is, which one third
would you like to be?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If you think of the moments
in your life that are just
so off-the-charts
exciting or fulfilling,
they are the moments when
you are really connected.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I was a Congressman at
29 and doing all right.
And then in 2008 after being
in Congress for about six years
and my life getting more
and more hectic, more
and more responsibilities,
more and more burdens,
a lot of negative thoughts,
a lot of self-criticism of,
you can do better.
Why didn't you do this?
Or why didn't you do that?
And really beating yourself
up to where I felt like I
was going to be burned out.
And I was 35 years old.
And I thought, you know,
I'm going to be burned out
by the time I'm 40.
There was always
a sense growing up
that there needed to be a
space, a time for contemplation,
for some silence,
for some prayer.
There were rosaries everywhere
in the house, on the chairs,
on the bed posts.
I meditated on and off for
years with no real discipline.
After the 2008
election, I really
wanted to jumpstart a
daily meditation practice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It really changed my life.
I really got a taste of what
it is like to have your mind
and your body synchronized.
Mindfulness is a
type of meditation
that works on awareness.
We honor and
respect the athletes
and the performers who do this
all the time, the musicians.
When we see someone pay
attention completely, wholly,
mind, body in the same
spot, we love that.
We go to concerts, we all
sing along to the same song
all in unison, all in
the present moment,
all being moved.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And after I got a taste
of it, I really thought,
we have to introduce
this into the health care
system in America.
I'm on the Armed
Services Committee,
which oversees the
entire policies that
affect the men and women
in our armed services.
Part of what we're
working on now
is trying to really get
mindfulness training
and mind-fitness training into
some of the basic training
that the men and women have
to get before they even
go overseas or become
fully certified
as soldiers for our country.
The openness has
really been surprising.
Members of Congress
pull me off to the side
and say, hey, what is this
you're talking about here?
Because I'm fried
and I need something.
The greatest waste I think
we have in the country
today is the wasting
of our human resources
that go untapped, the
inner resources that we
have at our disposal
that we never tap into.
"We don't need to go
further to the left
or further to the right.
We all need to go deeper.
We need everyone committed
to growing and developing
themselves to their
full potential.
Much of our talent this country
goes untapped and undeveloped.
It sits on the sidelines or is
pushed there because of fear,
doubt, and suffering."
This is an excerpt from
my book "Mindful Nation."
Every time I fly into New
York City, I think about 9/11,
and I think about the people
calling from the airplane
to their family members.
And they were all calling
to say, I love you.
That was the last thing they
were going to say to somebody.
Because at that point,
nothing else mattered.
Everything else falls off.
All the BS is gone.
And it's just basic humanity,
a realization of the connection
that we have with each other.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We are born with
an understanding
that we need each
other to survive.
And our species has
evolved in a way
that we understand
at the deepest levels
that we are connected
to each other.
Once we see we're
connected, I think
that will change our politics.
Because it's not
the 1%, the 99%.
It's the 100%.
We're all in this together.
We're all connected.
So how do we figure out how to
bring that into our daily life?
I think it begins by developing
those inner resources
and teaching Americans
how to have and cultivate
that inner life, which
is I think fundamental.
My hope, really, is that by
slowing down and practicing
mindfulness in
whatever way people
see fit gets us back in tune
with that basic connection
that we have.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, I have a noisy
mind during the day sometimes,
and just to reset it, to
reboot it, let it settle,
let the thoughts settle.
Sometimes part of
the meditation is
inventory, compartmentalizing
stuff that's all cloudy.
Well, obviously the
whole vibrational world
will change when
we all meditate.
But each person one at a
time is making a difference.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We all know that nirvana or
Samadhi or Christ consciousness
or taqwa--
we all know that is this
idea of a sustained,
blissful existence, heaven
on Earth is possible.
We see ourselves moving
in the right direction,
evolving happier more
often than before.
They say in this yogi sutras,
in the yoga scripture,
it says, every day or
as much as possible.
I take the practice every
day, and your practice
improves by consistency.
And we know that to be true.
I mean, if you
meditate every day,
you can see on the scanner--
neurologists can say
the more you do it,
the better it is, right?
When you meditate, it just
kind of brings you up.
It brings you into
alignment, you know?
And I think that's what
asana is about, holding up--
to move and smile and
breathe in every pose,
right, but try to
make the poses-- get
the proper alignment,
get the bricks in order.
So I think that informs the way
we meditate, the way we sit.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We have to get past
the idea that there's
one meditation
greater than the other
and that one way is better,
but the idea of quieting
through various different forms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We know that sitting and
letting the nervous system calm
is great, because the
fluctuation of the mind settle,
and the nervous system settles.
Some yogis say that yoga is
the cessation of fluctuation
of the nervous system.
Some people translate
that second sutra
as the nervous system
being what we want to calm.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Vibration.
I have to go speak at Google.
>> I know-- about meditation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I always say we can do twice
as much in half the time,
I mean when we meditate.
I mean, I take my time
out every day, right?
I have a film company, a TV
company, a record company,
a music company, three internet
companies, financial service
company, five charities.
And yet every day, no matter
what, I get to meditate and do
a physical asana practice.
I take 2 and 1/2 hours out
of my busy day to do that.
And I feel like
the seconds awake
are the only times you're
creative or happy or really
productive.
And so the more we can
expound on those seconds,
the more effective we are.
So if we're more present
than not more often than not,
then in those present moments,
we're coming up with good ideas
or we're responding in
more thoughtful ways.
And that's what a CEO has to
do, respond in a thoughtful way.
Because in the end,
everybody is going to work
and going crazy based
on your instruction.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The insecurity of life, the
instability of life so true
for each of us.
It's like any
single one of us can
check our cell phone messages
and listen to one message.
And by the time we hang up,
we have a different life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My mother died when I was nine,
and then my father disappeared.
By the time I went
to college, I had
lived in five different
family configurations.
I was just so deeply unhappy
and confused and frightened.
And that was all covered
over with this layer
of, as many people experience,
this kind of opaque silence,
because no one ever talked
about what had happened.
When I was a
sophomore in college,
I took an Asian
philosophy course.
And honestly looking
back, it feels like it
was kind of happenstance.
It was on a Tuesday
or something,
and I thought, oh,
that's convenient.
I'll do that course.
And it completely
changed my life.
It turned out to be
a course in Buddhism.
And the first thing I
heard in the course that
was just riveting
and amazing was,
the Buddha's very unafraid,
unashamed acknowledgment
of the suffering in life.
And so he was saying,
you're not alone,
you don't have to feel weird
or isolated or cut off.
This is a part of life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I think it's a pretty
revolutionary act
to admit and acknowledge the
suffering and the potential
for suffering that we all share.
And it has, I think,
really for me brought me
to a different level
of understanding
about compassion, both
compassion for myself
and compassion for
others, compassion--
the trembling or the quivering
of the heart in response
to seeing someone's
pain or suffering.
We hear so many messages
about what we need
and what we should have and we
should never make a mistake.
You know, there's so many
things that we kind of take on.
And I think it's very
powerful, and it's
kind of a big adventure to
say, well, you know what?
Let me really look.
Let me see for myself.
So I feel very empowered by that
possibility of introspection
and discernment and not
necessarily believing
all those messages.
I do have a daily practice.
That's really like the
bedrock of not my only my day,
but really of my life.
Because if I think
about the qualities
I try to bring into
my day of integrity
or presence or
listening or compassion,
I really find it centered there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I often do loving kindness
practice just walking down
the streets of New York City.
It's great fun.
I'll be silently
offering phrases
of loving kindness to myself
as I walk down the street.
May you be happy.
May you be peaceful.
Then as people
walk by, I'll just
include them, just kind of
silently saying, oh, be happy.
May you be happy and
may you be peaceful.
May you be happy and may you be
peaceful, something like that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Close your eyes.
And in moments, you're diving.
You're diving within.
It's like soft electricity.
The whole thing opens up
to an unbounded feeling.
Before I started meditating,
I heard the word "meditation,"
and it meant almost
nothing to me.
It seemed like a fad and a
waste of time and not for me.
Being an artist, I
felt like maybe it's
going to fiddle
with my creativity.
Maybe this thing
is going to make
me want to just stop working
and sit under a tree.
I was accepted to the
American Film Institute,
and I was given an opportunity
to make my first feature.
I was given money.
I had all the equipment I
could dream of given to me.
At this point, I remember
standing and looking
at this wall,
thinking, I should be
the happiest person on Earth.
But I looked inside, and
the happiness was just
a dance on the surface--
below, hollow.
I said, whoa, no
inner happiness.
Looking back, I felt
I had a weakness.
I wasn't self-assured,
even though I
had great desires and ideas.
I had anxieties like
crazy, like everybody.
I had a kind of tremendous
anger toward my first wife.
I wasn't dealing
with a full deck.
There's a thing in people where,
for one reason or another,
suddenly they become a seeker.
They just become a seeker.
Somewhere along
the line, I heard
this phrase, true
happiness is not out there.
True happiness lies within.
And this phrase had a
ring of truth to it.
But the phrase doesn't tell you
where the "within" is, nor does
it tell you how to get there.
You need a key that opens
the door to that treasury.
That's the trick.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I might draw you a picture.
This line here we'll say
represents the surface of life.
This here is matter.
And this is mind.
Mind and matter.
They say scientists about
200 or 300 years ago started
wondering what was this matter.
What was it really?
And they started
delving into matter.
And in about the
1970s, quantum physics
discovered the unified field,
the unity of all the particles
and all the forces
of manifestation
of creation, unity, oneness.
Everything that is a thing,
including frogs, fish,
babbling brook, sun, stars,
galaxies, the whole universe,
superstructures, and all those
little elementary particles
has emerged from this field.
The experience of this field is
what's missing in today's life.
I thought, maybe this
thing of meditation
is a way to go within.
I had doubts.
At the same time, I felt
there was something truthful
about it, and I wanted it.
And I went, and I
learned on July 1, 1973,
about 11:30 on a Saturday,
beautiful, sunny Saturday
morning.
Within the first
two weeks, I started
getting happier in the work,
more happiness in the doing.
Ideas seemed to
come more easily.
This anger kind of went away.
I got a feeling of more freedom.
And it felt very,
very good to be alive.
A bigger picture of
life started emerging.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Transcendental
meditation opens the door
to this deepest level
of life, this treasury.
In transcendental
meditation, you're
given a mantra, the very
specific sound vibration
thought designed to turn
the awareness from out 180
degrees to within.
Once you're pointed within,
you will naturally and easily
dive and experience this
unbounded, eternal, infinite,
immutable, immortal field of
consciousness, unity, oneness.
In Vedic terms, of this field
is called Atman, meaning
the Self with a
capital S. Another
is Brahm, meaning totality.
This Atman is Brahm.
The self is totality--
so beautiful.
This is our full potential,
to live in totality.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Stories throughout time we
have conflict and torment
and struggles.
The artist doesn't have to
suffer to show suffering.
You have to
understand the thing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Every human being has
consciousness, but not
every human being
has the same amount.
So if you have a ball of
consciousness this big
and you start transcending
on a regular basis,
this ball of consciousness
will start expanding.
What you're doing is making
the subconscious now conscious.
You're unfolding the full
potential of the human being.
You're cleaning the
machine of stresses,
anxieties, depression, hate,
anger, rage, despair, and fear.
So you live and work in
more and more freedom.
All positive happiness
and bliss and love
growing from within,
garbage going out.
And those things that
used to stress you
don't have the
same power anymore.
This is magical.
How beautiful is this?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The sunlight in LA
makes me feel freedom.
And it makes me feel the
field of all possibilities.
And that's a nice
thing to think about.
The Maharishi said,
don't fight the darkness.
Don't even worry about it.
Simply turn on the light.
Get down in there, and darkness,
negativity goes away in time,
for sure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I think for all of us, there
is a closeness to ourselves
that we're longing for.
So, I live in New York City.
We are sitting in my apartment
with my kids' toys everywhere
and my work things
everywhere, food and plants
and noise and cars.
And the whole city is
happening around us.
We're two blocks away
from that big protest.
I didn't know
before I learned how
to just sit and
be still and watch
that all of the chaos and all
of the doubt and all the fear
is actually exactly
the road to my freedom.
You don't have to go to the
mountaintop to meditate.
You should and could
do it right here.
This is where we figure out
exactly how much power we have.
I started trying to
meditate in 1998 when
I was training to be a teacher.
And my teacher was a
Tibetan Buddhist teacher.
And that's how the practice
of meditation began for me.
I really struggled for a
really long time to sit at all.
And around 2000, 2001,
I met another teacher
who taught me that five
minutes a day is all I need.
Just do five minutes,
dead or alive,
first thing in the morning.
To sit and be quiet
for five minutes
and just watch my breathing
and listen to the way
it reached all these
different parts of my body
was a big effort for me.
There is now a need
four in my life.
As much as I need to brush
my teeth, I need to sit,
because if I don't
sit, I feel the--
I feel static inside.
I feel sharper.
I feel less a master
of my experience.
In the practices of yoga and
particularly in meditation,
it's you and you.
There's nobody else there.
And the hilarious
paradox is that we're
tuning in to ourselves.
And that's exactly
the thing that helps
us listen to other people.
One of the most important
aspects of my job,
I feel as a teacher, is to make
sure that everybody is aware
that everything that they do is
having an impact on all of us.
Every thought that I
have is impacting you.
Every thought that you
have is impacting me.
Every move that I make
is impacting and rippling
into everything around me.
We're all having these
little resonances
with each other all the time.
For more of us to
be meditating is
to refine that resonance
so that when we share space
with another person,
when we share thoughts
with another person, when we
share love with another person,
there is not only a clarity, but
a directionality to what we're
doing.
There's a purpose.
There's a mission.
This word keeps coming up,
but there's an elegance.
I longed for that as a kid.
I longed for even into my 20s.
Can I please just be elegant?
Why?
I know what it looks like.
I recognize it in other
people, men and women.
Why can't I just
find that in myself?
For all of us to go
deeper into that practice
is to refine our contributions
on the Earth, our emanations.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I just want to make sure that
I'm grateful for everything
so that I can keep
perpetuating what is amazing.
And what isn't can
just slowly fade.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We sort of live all our
lives preparing to be happy.
We're never actually happy
when we experience things.
My name is Metteyya,
and I'm from Lumbini.
It's a very small, little town
in Himalayan country of Nepal,
actually well known as the
birthplace of Lord Buddha.
And I was born in that village.
It was my great fortune
to be born there.
And I have devoted a
major part of my life
in the study and practice
of Buddhist teachings.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I started studying, I
went to college, did my--
I was actually
enrolled in science.
So I was doing physics and bio.
Fortunately, I quit.
[LAUGHS] Otherwise I don't
know where I would end up--
maybe some college or something.
Because my senior
brother, he is engineer,
and that's what my
family wanted me to be.
Personally, I wanted
to be a doctor.
I thought, maybe that way I
can serve the society better.
What was I searching for?
What was I looking for?
What I really wanted to
do becomes very clear.
Just like Buddha, I
want to get enlightened.
I had such a burning desire.
At that time, I was
trying to understand,
what is this Western world?
Because by that
time, I had started
hearing about it, the
Western world and then
these developed countries
and all of these ideas.
So I really wanted to
understand how it's going on.
I realized all the genius people
born in Western hemisphere,
they have been somehow
naturally very interested
in searching that is outer.
Like electricity was discovered
here, so many other things,
these technologies, the
wonderful roads, buildings,
and everything,
how to design, how
to improve their life in outer.
And when I really
started searching deeply,
I realized all the genius people
that were born in our culture,
in our Eastern world,
somehow unknowingly devoted
all their life, all
their time trying
to find out something that
is inner, investigating mind.
Mind is a very
mysterious object.
It has no shape, no
form, and no address.
We never know where it lives.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we say the
closest link to reach
to the mind is with
the body, our own body.
And we can say, for example,
when we are very angry,
and let's say our mind is
very angry at something,
it starts showing
result in our body.
Our heartbeats raise.
Our breathing becomes very fast.
We start feeling hot
and this and that.
Things happen.
So ritual in a way
is to train the body.
When we calm down our
body, make it to relaxed,
it becomes able to identify
the mind and work with it.
There are certain facts, certain
truths about the universe,
that affect every single thing.
When we start observing, a
very universal phenomenon
starts arising.
It starts becoming very
apparent that things change,
things are evolving constantly.
When we are present,
observing, and very absolutely
doing nothing from our
side and just observing,
reality starts appearing.
We start seeing that
our minds are changing,
our hearts are
changing, our emotions
are changing all the time.
Also outside the
seasons are changing.
Everything is moving.
This is a universal
principle, inertia law,
that affects and governs
every single entity in it.
And it also affects our
own life, from our thoughts
to our environment
to our community
and says, when we meditate,
we become aware and double up
the quality to be
able to perceive
that everything is changing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Once that starts
becoming apparent,
we start connecting ourselves
to this bigger phenomenon that's
all around us.
This is the enlightenment.
This is the state of leading
towards the enlightenment.
But that gives us
a profound peace.
It is the beginning of peace.
My initial question was
something like a seed.
And over the years, it evolved.
There were roots.
There were branches.
And several other things
started happening.
And I started searching for
something else and something
else.
It has been a continuously
evolving search.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The first Buddhist text
that I ever read says,
look to your mind, wise
man, look to it well.
It is subtle, invisible,
and treacherous.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I really related to
the treacherous--
I mean, the whole thing,
subtle and invisible--
but treacherous.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My name is Mark Epstein,
and I'm a psychiatrist
and a writer about Buddhism
and psychoanalysis.
I started doing meditation
retreats when I was 21 or so
and then started
writing about it.
So it's been part of
my life ever since.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When I was still in college,
I looked to both Buddhism
and psychotherapy to
try to find some relief
from my own worries.
My first therapist
told me, you're just
suffering from what we
call an Oedipus complex,
and you should feel better
once you realize that.
And the language
helped me, but it
didn't give me an experience of
relief that I was looking for.
I went straight from there
to the Buddhist world.
And the first Buddhist
teachers that I met basically
told me, learn how to feel.
I had to sit back
into myself and start
to feel the texture
of my own experience.
Relaxing into that is
what I sometimes call
the formless art of meditation.
[BANGING]
>> I'm Arlene Schekett,
and I'm a sculptor.
After graduate school, I
would listen to public radio
while I was working.
And they had Alan Watts' tapes.
Sort of perked
something up in me
that I started to think of as
very aligned with art-making.
>> You can look at something
with a microscope and see it
a certain way.
You can look at it
with a naked eye
and see it in a certain way.
You look at it with a telescope
and you see it another way.
>> The drone of his voice
and the strangeness of his
metaphors was attractive to me.
>> Some human beings have
slipped somehow or other
into states of consciousness,
where they see the apparent
disintegration and
disorganization of everyday
life as completely harmonious.
>> The notion of being in the
zone or a creative state was
very much the kind of meditative
consciousness that he was
talking about.
I don't think meditation
is about stillness.
A spiritual practice has to do
with awareness and attention
and sensitivity to being
alive and to those things,
those qualities of
aliveness in everything.
I use awareness in
the studio, and I
want to be bringing that
aliveness into the work
and I want to be paying
attention in the studio
to what's happening.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's a text about
mindfulness that when I was
on one of these retreats, the
phrase came to me when I was
sitting, something like, the
monk sits down cross-legged
and places his
mindfulness before him.
>> There was one time when Mark
went on a meditation retreat
that both kids got chicken
pox at the same time,
and I was alone.
So that was sort of a memorable
experience that they--
>> I don't remember that.
>> Yeah.
We're married.
>> How long have
you been married?
>> 30 years.
>> No, 31.
31.
>> And counting.
>> It wasn't either of our
first major relationships.
And one of the things that
we always talked about
was that we needed the separate
time but also the together
time.
>> He didn't actually get--
>> Yeah, what that was.
>> --how much time-- how much
time and effort that I required
in that forum.
Because when we first got
together, he was like,
where are you going?
>> Yeah.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> That's when I
started writing.
>> Yeah, I'm going to my studio.
>> I started writing when
Arlene went to her studio,
because I was just
assuming we'd be together.
>> Yeah, like,
where are you going?
I said, studio.
So it was a little bumpy there.
>> I never thought of
myself as a writer.
It surprised me.
My latest book is called "The
Trauma of Everyday Life."
What I realized
is that we're all
going to experience the
trauma of our own deaths
or the deaths of the people
that we love the most.
If we're not suffering
from post-traumatic stress,
we're suffering from
pre-traumatic stress,
and we sense that.
That's part of the shaky
ground of everyday life.
From the Buddhist
point of view, the way
out is through, that by facing
those most difficult feelings,
we actually can find
some relief from them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
There comes a point, I
found, with meditation
where you have to really take
it inside and make it your own.
And that's about
figuring out how
to let yourself present
itself to your mind.
Get who you think you
are out of the way
so that what you don't
know can begin to surface.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I make decisions about
how I'm going to work,
what I'm going to work with,
and ultimately then what is made
based on not predetermining what
I'm going to create before I
actually make the thing.
So I choose materials
based on how
they respond to me,
to the moment, body
to body, right then and there.
When I first started
thinking like this,
I was using Hydrocal,
a combination
of cement and plaster.
And that material
within 5 to 10 minutes
is transformed
from something that
is a liquid to something
that is completely hard.
So it was like working against
time, with time, using time.
That was probably my
first Buddhist version
of what it could be like
to be in the studio.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I've learned from being
married to an artist,
there was a process
of making art,
which is akin to the process
of making meditation,
where you have to
be both the maker,
but also you have to be able to
lose yourself in the thing that
you are making.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> One day I was working, and I
made this lump that most people
would not identify as a Buddha.
But I realized I was already
thinking about this time issue
and that it had, in fact, made
me see this lump as something
iconic.
And to have the Buddha around
was reminding me to pay
attention .
And not thinking about it
as anything but a practice,
I grew in the next two
years this family of Buddhas
that I felt in fact became
art but also something else.
We have two kids, a
27-year-old daughter and a son
who just turned 24 this week.
They're just spectacular.
We're all, I think,
pretty secure in wanting
to be in the family,
which is exciting.
Having kids has been a
complete and utter teaching
about things changing and
growing and transforming.
>> The core teaching of Buddhism
not to push away the unpleasant
and not to cling to the pleasant
let me see how family life was
a kind of extended
meditation retreat, you know,
like a 20-year
meditation retreat,
that you needed the same
approach, which was,
whatever comes, I'm
going to deal with.
>> Accepting that the
relationship is alive means
accepting that it's not
necessarily an easy thing.
>> The relationship
itself is always evolving.
It's always changing.
And to treat it as something
that has to be nourished,
I can never be
totally understood,
that whole way of approaching
the relationship for me
comes out of the dharma.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We've had really strong
times and really weak links.
But we've managed to pull it--
we're here right now.
[LAUGHS] I don't
know what to say.
>> It's still ongoing.
>> The forum is ongoing.
We're inventing it as we speak.
[MUSIC PLAYING]